Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. We are now
starting to talk about algebra in this series
on foundational aspects of mathematics, and today
we're going to talk about a rather important step
up from linear equations: quadratic equations,
which have a very long and illustrious history.
So the basic problem is something like this:
suppose that we have the equation x^2 = 49.
What does x^2 mean? It means x * x, okay?
That's called the squaring operation. So
we'd like to know what is the solution
to this equation. What can x be? Well,
if you know your multiplication table, you'll
know that 7 * 7 is 49, so there's the solution
x = 7. But if you think about it for a little
while, you'll also realize that -7 is also a
solution because -7 * -7 is also 49. So if we're
going to allow negative numbers—and we don't have
to—but if we are going to, then there's
actually two solutions: x = 7 and x = -7.
Now for this kind of quadratic equation, knowing
what the squares are is very useful. This is
something that probably most public school
students haven't seen, but it's a good thing
for them to see. They don't have to memorize it,
but they should have at least seen this table of
squares up to a certain amount. So here I've
shown you what they all are: probably from 1
up to 100. It's familiar, maybe 11 squared, 12
squared, familiar. But then 13 squared is 169,
14 squared is 196, 15 squared is 225, 16 squared
is 256, 17 squared is 289, 18 squared is 324,
19 squared is 361, 20 squared is 400, 100 squared
is 10,000. Those are all useful values to know.
But what if we're given a bigger equation
like x^2 = 6,084? How did I get 6,084? Well,
I took the number 78 and I squared it. So this is
an easy way of generating a quadratic equation:
you take some number, you square it, and
then you give your friend this equation. Say,
"What is x^2 equals blah blah blah?" You know
because you've taken a number and squared it,
but for him to unravel that operation might be a
little bit tricky. So we're going to try to think
about this kind of quadratic equation
and some more general variants of it.
But before we do, let's have a look
at some general laws which are very
pertinent to understanding quadratic equations.
The first is what happens when we square x + 1:
(x + 1)^2. So that's (x + 1) * (x + 1).
If we use the distributive law here,
there's an x here and another x here
for a total of 2x, and then there's
also a +1. So a very important equation or
identity is that (x + 1)^2 is x^2 + 2x + 1.
This is important because, first of all, it
allows us to generate this table a little
bit more efficiently than squaring each
individual number. For example, suppose we
know that 20^2 is 400 and we want to know what is
21 squared. Well, according to this little rule,
it's 20^2 + 2 * 20 which is 40 + 1. So to
go from here to here, we just take this one,
add two times the value here which is 20, and
add one. Similarly, to go from here to here,
we take this number, add two times that, which
would be 42. We add that, and we get 483, and then
we add one more to get 484. That's a somewhat
faster way of generating a table like this.
This identity has an important generalization
when we replace the one with a general y:
(x + y)^2. All students of algebra learn that this
is x^2 + 2xy + y^2. Here we're already seeing a
kind of change in our use of the variables x and
y. When I write down this equation, I'm no longer
thinking of x and y as unknown quantities. I'm
rather thinking of them as representing arbitrary
or general numbers. So it's no longer a question
of having a look at this and saying what is x,
what is y. x and y are not mystery numbers. This
is a general law that applies to any x and any y.
It's a slightly different usage of the letters
x and y. We'll keep that in mind for later.
So here's a more general quadratic equation:
x^2 + 10x = 39. x is some mystery number that
satisfies this equation, and I want you to tell
me what x is. Well, you can try trial and error,
try x = 1, try x = 2, and so on until
eventually you'll get it. In this case,
it's not too hard, but a general strategy
for solving this kind of equation has been
known by many cultures. So the ancient
Chinese, the Babylonians, the Arabs,
the Hindus—they all had ideas of how to solve this
kind of equation. In particular, Al-Khwarizmi,
who we mentioned before around 800 AD, had
the following rather nice interpretation.
So we think of an L-shaped figure like this, where
this has side x (whatever x is) and this has side
five. Here, symmetrically, x and five. We're
thinking now about the area of this L-shaped
region. There's an x^2 here for that square,
and each of these rectangles has area 5x. So
altogether, the area is x^2 + 10x because we
have two of these rectangles. That's exactly
the left-hand side. Now what we do is we
think about completing this diagram to a
square. In other words, these dotted lines
here—we add another portion so that now we
have a complete square. Once we've done that,
we have a square whose side is x + 5. So this
total area here will be (x + 5)^2, and that's
going to be the area that we started with,
which we're assuming is 39, plus the area of
the square that we've added. What is the area
of the square that we've added? Well,
it's 5 by 5, so this area here is 25.
So (x + 5)^2, the entire area here, is 39 + 25,
which we work out is 64. Now the equation has
been transformed from an equation like this to
the equation (x + 5)^2 = 64. This is very much
like the simpler kind of equation that we've
already been talking about. Its solution is
x + 5 = 8 because 8 * 8 is 64. From that, we
can deduce that x = 8 - 5, which is three.
Now there's another solution too because
we could also have chosen -8 as the square
root of 64. So there would be another solution
here obtained by taking -8 - 5, which is -13.